ID: govreport_76
Source: govreport

===== SUMMARY =====
Under the Federal Power Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) issues licenses for up to 50 years to construct and operate nonfederal hydropower projects. These projects must be relicensed when their licenses expire to continue operating. Relevant federal resource agencies issue license conditions to protect federal lands and prescriptions to assist fish passage on these projects. Under section 241 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, parties to the licensing process may (1) request a "trial-type hearing" on any disputed issue of material fact related to a condition or prescription and (2) propose alternative conditions or prescriptions. In this context, GAO was asked to (1) determine the extent to which stakeholders have used section 241 provisions in relicensing and their outcomes and (2) describe stakeholders' views on section 241's impact on relicensing and conditions and prescriptions. GAO analyzed relicensing documents filed with FERC and conducted a total of 61 interviews with representatives from relevant federal resource agencies, FERC, licensees, tribal groups, industry groups, and environmental groups. Since the passage of the Energy Policy Act in 2005, nonfederal stakeholders--licensees, states, environmental groups, and an Indian tribe--used section 241 provisions for 25 of the 103 eligible hydropower projects being relicensed, most of which occurred within the first year. Of these 25 projects, stakeholders proposed a total of 211 alternative conditions and prescriptions. In response, the federal resource agencies (U.S. Department of Agriculture's Forest Service, Department of Commerce's National Marine Fisheries Service, and several bureaus in the Department of the Interior) accepted no alternatives as originally proposed but instead modified a total of 140 and removed a total of 9 of the agencies' preliminary conditions and prescriptions and rejected 42 of the 211 alternatives; the remaining alternatives are pending as of May 17, 2010. Under section 241, resource agencies must submit a statement to FERC explaining the basis for accepting or rejecting a proposed alternative. While agencies generally provided explanations for rejecting alternative conditions and prescriptions, with few exceptions, they did not explain the reasons for not accepting alternatives when they modified conditions and prescriptions. As a result, it is difficult to determine the extent, type, or basis of changes that were made and difficult to determine if and how the proposed alternatives affected the final conditions and prescriptions issued by the agencies. As of May 17, 2010, nonfederal stakeholders requested trial-type hearings for 18 of the 25 projects in which section 241 provisions were used, and three trial-type hearings were completed. Of the remaining 15 projects, requests for hearings were withdrawn for 14 of them when licensees and agencies negotiated a settlement agreement before the administrative law judge made a ruling, and one is pending because the licensee is in negotiations to decommission the project. In the three hearings held to date, the administrative law judge ruled in favor of the agencies on most issues. According to the federal and nonfederal relicensing stakeholders GAO spoke with, the section 241 provisions have had a variety of effects on the relicensing process and on the license conditions and prescriptions. While most licensees and a few agency officials said that section 241 encourages settlement agreements between the licensee and resource agency, some agency officials said that section 241 made agreements more difficult because efforts to negotiate have moved to preparing for potential hearings. Regarding conditions and prescriptions, some stakeholders commented that under section 241, agencies put more effort into reviewing and providing support for their conditions and prescriptions, but environmental groups and some agency officials said that in their opinion, agencies issued fewer or less environmentally protective conditions and prescriptions. Many agency officials also raised concerns about increases in workload and costs as a result of section 241. For example, their estimated costs for the three hearings to date totaled approximately $3.1 million. Furthermore, many of the stakeholders offered suggestions for improving the use of section 241, including adjusting the time frame for a trial-type hearing. GAO recommends that cognizant officials who do not adopt a proposed alternative include reasons why in their statement to FERC. The resource agencies generally agreed, but commented that no explanation is required when an alternative is withdrawn as a result of negotiations.

===== REPORT TEXT =====
FPA includes several provisions designed to protect fish, wildlife, and the environment from the potentially damaging effects of a hydropower project’s operations. Specifically: Section 4(e) states that licenses for projects on federal lands reserved by Congress for other purposes—such as national forests—are subject to the mandatory conditions set by federal resource agencies, including the Forest Service and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Reclamation, and FWS. Section 10(a) requires FERC to solicit recommendations from federal and state resource agencies and Indian tribes affected by a hydropower project’s operation on the terms and conditions to be proposed for inclusion in a license. Section 10(j) authorizes federal and state fish and wildlife agencies to recommend license conditions to benefit fish and wildlife. FERC must include section 10(j) recommendations in the hydropower licenses unless it (1) finds them to be inconsistent with law and (2) has already established license conditions that adequately protect fish and wildlife. Section 18 requires FERC to include license prescriptions for fish passage prescribed by resource agencies, such as FWS and NMFS. Under section 241 and the interim rules, licensees and other nonfederal stakeholders may request a trial-type hearing with duration of up to 90 days on any disputed issue of material fact with respect to a preliminary condition or prescription. An administrative law judge (ALJ), referred by the relevant resource agency, must resolve all disputed issues of material fact related to an agency’s preliminary conditions or prescriptions in a single hearing. The interim rules contain procedures for consolidating multiple hearing requests involving the same project. Under section 241 and the interim rules, licensees and other nonfederal stakeholders may also propose alternatives to the preliminary conditions or prescriptions proposed by the resource agencies. Under section 241, resource agencies are required to adopt the alternatives if the agency determines that they adequately protect the federal land and either cost significantly less to implement or result in improved electricity production. If the alternatives do not meet these criteria, the agencies may reject them. In either case, under section 241, resource agencies must formally submit a statement to FERC explaining the basis for any condition or prescription the agency adopts and reason for not accepting any alternative under this section. The statement must demonstrate that the Secretary of the department gave equal consideration to the effects of the alternatives on energy supply, distribution, cost, and use; flood control; navigation; water supply; and air quality (in addition to the preservation of other aspects of environmental quality). In addition, the resource agencies often negotiate with the stakeholders who submitted the alternatives and settle on modifications of the agencies’ preliminary conditions and prescriptions. FPA requires licensees to pay reasonable annual charges in amounts fixed by FERC to reimburse the United States for, among other things, the costs of FERC’s and other federal agencies’ administration of the act’s hydropower provisions. To identify these costs—virtually all of which are related to the relicensing process—FERC annually requests federal agencies to report their costs related to the hydropower program for the prior fiscal year. FERC then bills individual licensees for their share of FERC’s and the other federal agencies’ administrative costs, basing these shares largely on the generating capacity and amount of electricity generated by the licensees’ projects. FERC deposits the licensees’ reimbursements—together with other annual charges and filing fees that it collects—into the U.S. Treasury as a direct offset to its annual appropriation. Receipts that exceed FERC’s annual appropriation are deposited in the General Fund of the U.S. Treasury. Nonfederal stakeholders—licensees, states, environmental groups, and an Indian tribe—used the section 241 provisions for 25 of the 103 (24 percent) eligible hydropower projects being relicensed, although the use of these provisions has decreased since its first year. In response to the use of these provisions, resource agencies modified most of the conditions and prescriptions that they had originally proposed. In addition, trial-type hearings were completed for three projects, with the resource agencies prevailing in most of the issues in these hearings. From November 17, 2005, through May 17, 2010, 103 hydropower projects being relicensed, including 49 transition projects, were eligible for nonfederal stakeholders to use the section 241 provisions to submit alternative conditions or prescriptions or request a trial-type hearing. Nonfederal stakeholders have used the provisions for 25 of these 103 projects, including 15 of the 49 transition projects. Table 1 shows the 25 projects, the nonfederal stakeholder proposing alternatives, the affected federal resource agency, and whether the stakeholder requested a trial- type hearing. In each of these projects, the licensee submitted one or more alternatives. In addition, in the DeSabla-Centerville, Klamath, and McCloud-Pit projects, stakeholders other than the licensee also submitted alternatives. The use of section 241 provisions has decreased since the first year. In fiscal year 2006, nonfederal stakeholders used section 241 provisions for 19 projects undergoing relicensing. By comparison, after fiscal year 2006, nonfederal stakeholders used the provisions for only 6 projects. Fifteen of the 19 projects in which stakeholders used the provisions in fiscal year 2006 were transition projects. These transition projects included 11 projects that had expired original licenses and were operating on annual licenses at the time that the interim rules were implemented, which helped create the initial surge of projects eligible to use section 241. As table 2 shows, the number of eligible nontransition projects—projects that had received preliminary conditions and prescriptions from federal resource agencies after section 241 was enacted—for which nonfederal stakeholders have sought to use section 241 provisions has declined since the first year. However, the number of nontransition projects becoming subject to these provisions has not widely varied. Licensees and other nonfederal stakeholders had proposed a total of 211 alternatives—194 alternative conditions and 17 alternative prescriptions—for the 25 projects where section 241 provisions were used. However, these numbers do not necessarily reflect the number of issues considered because section 4(e) conditions and section 18 fishway prescriptions are counted differently. For example, a resource agency may issue a section 4(e) condition for each part of a particular topic. However, NMFS or FWS will typically issue single section 18 fishway prescriptions with multiple sections. Of the 25 projects, stakeholders proposed alternative conditions for 19 and alternative prescriptions for 9. Table 3 provides the number of alternative conditions proposed, accepted, rejected, and pending, and the number of preliminary conditions modified or removed for 19 of the 25 projects. Table 4 provides the number of alternative prescriptions proposed, accepted, rejected, and pending and the number of preliminary prescriptions modified or removed in settlement for 9 of the 25 projects. As the tables show, instead of accepting or rejecting alternative conditions and prescriptions, resource agencies most frequently modified the original conditions and prescriptions in settlement negotiations with the nonfederal stakeholders. In all, resource agencies did not formally accept any alternatives as originally proposed and instead modified a total of 140 preliminary conditions and prescriptions for 22 of rejected a total of 42 alternative conditions and prescriptions in 5 projects, and removed a total of 9 preliminary conditions and prescriptions in 4 projects. Licensees submitted 204 of the 211 alternative conditions and prescriptions. State agencies or nongovernmental organizations submitted the remaining 7 alternative conditions, 4 of which were rejected by the resource agencies, and 3 were being considered as of May 17, 2010. Section 241 directs the Secretary of the relevant resource agency to explain the basis for any condition or prescription the agency adopts, provide a reason for not accepting any alternative condition under this section, and demonstrate that it gave equal consideration to the effects of the alternatives on energy supply, distribution, cost, and use; flood control; navigation; water supply; and air quality (in addition to the preservation of other aspects of environmental quality). Similarly, the agencies’ interim rules provide, “The written statement must explain the basis for the modified conditions or prescriptions and, if the Department did not accept an alternative condition or prescription, its reasons for not doing so.” While the agencies provided an explanation for rejecting all 42 alternative conditions and prescriptions, they did not explain the reasons for not accepting a proposed alternative for 127 of the 140 modified conditions and prescriptions. Without an explanation, it is difficult to determine the extent, type, or basis of changes that were made and difficult to determine if and how the proposed alternatives affected the final conditions and prescriptions issued by the agencies. As of May 17, 2010, nonfederal stakeholders requested trial-type hearings for 18 of the 25 projects in which the section 241 provisions were used, and 3 trial-type hearings were completed. Most of these requests were made by licensees. The requests for hearings in 14 of the 18 projects were withdrawn when nonfederal stakeholders and resource agencies reached a settlement agreement before the ALJ made a ruling, and 1 request is pending as of May 17, 2010, because the licensee is in negotiations to decommission the project. Prior to a trial-type hearing, an ALJ holds a prehearing conference to identify, narrow, and clarify the disputed issues of material fact. The ALJ must issue an order that recites any agreements reached at the conference and any rulings made by the ALJ during or as a result of the prehearing conference, which can include dismissing issues the ALJ determines are not disputed issues of material fact. For the three projects that have completed trial-type hearings, the number of issues in these projects was reduced from 96 to 37 after prehearing conferences. In addition, in a fourth project in which the federal resource agencies and the licensee eventually reached a settlement before going to a hearing, the number of issues was reduced from 13 to 1 after the prehearing conference. As table 5 shows, the three trial-type hearings were held for the Klamath project, in California and Oregon; the Spokane River project, in Idaho and Washington; and the Tacoma project, in Colorado, all of which are nontransition projects. In addition to the licensees requesting hearings, one nongovernmental organization and one tribe requested a hearing for the Klamath project. The Spokane River and Tacoma hearings were completed in 90 days, the time allotted by the interim rule, while Klamath required 97 days. As table 5 shows, of the 37 issues presented, the ALJ ruled in favor of the federal resource agency on 25 issues, ruled in favor of the licensee on 6 issues, and offered a split decision on 6 issues. According to the relicensing stakeholders we spoke with, section 241 provisions have had a variety of effects on relicensing in three areas: (1) settlement agreements between licensees and resource agencies, (2) conditions and prescriptions that the resource agencies set, and (3) agencies’ workload and cost. Most licensees and a few resource agency officials that we spoke with said that section 241 encourages settlement agreements between the licensee and resource agency. In contrast, other agency officials we spoke with said that section 241 made the relicensing process more difficult to reach a settlement agreement with the licensee. Regarding conditions and prescriptions, some stakeholders commented that under section 241, resource agencies generally researched their conditions and prescriptions more thoroughly, while all seven of the environmental groups’ representatives and some resource agency officials we spoke with said that resource agencies issued fewer or less environmentally protective conditions and prescriptions. Resource agency officials also raised concerns about increases in workload and costs as a result of section 241. Finally, many of the stakeholders offered suggestions for improving the use of section 241. Most of the licensees and a few resource agency officials we spoke with said that section 241 encourages settlement agreements between the licensee and resource agency. Several licensees commented that before section 241 was enacted, they had little influence on the mandatory conditions and prescriptions and that the resource agencies had made decisions on which conditions and prescriptions to issue without the potential oversight of a third-party review. One licensee commented that resource agencies had little incentive to work collaboratively with the licensee during relicensing prior to section 241. Several licensees and a few resource agency officials said that under section 241, some resource agencies have been more willing to negotiate their conditions and prescriptions to avoid receiving alternatives and requests for trial-type hearings. Some resource agency officials, however, said that in some cases, reaching a settlement with the licensee has been more difficult under section 241 than in previous negotiations. Specifically, they noted the following: If licensees request a trial-type hearing, resource agencies and licensees have to devote time and resources to preparing for the potential upcoming trial-type hearing instead of negotiating a settlement. Section 241 made the relicensing process less cooperative and more antagonistic when, for example, a licensee did not conduct the agencies’ requested studies, the agencies had less information to support their conditions and prescriptions. As a case in point, one NMFS regional supervisor told us that a licensee declined to conduct a study about the effects of its dams’ turbines on fish mortality. However, the licensee subsequently requested a trial-type hearing because, it argued, the agency had no factual evidence to support the agency’s assertion that the turbines injured or killed fish. Some licensees used their ability to request a trial-type hearing as a threat against the agencies’ issuance of certain conditions, prescriptions, or recommendations. For example, two NMFS biologists and their division chief told us that a licensee had threatened to issue a trial-type hearing request on fish passage prescriptions if NMFS made flow rate recommendations that it did not agree with. The Hydropower Reform Coalition, a coalition of conservation and recreational organizations, commented that from its experience, participation in settlement negotiations under section 241 is “almost exclusively limited to licensees.” It also commented that agreements reached by the license applicant and resource agency are not comprehensive settlement agreements in which licensees, state and federal resource agencies, tribes, nongovernmental organizations, and other interested parties are involved in the agreement. Some licensees said agencies now put more effort into reviewing and providing support for their conditions and prescriptions because licensees or other nonfederal stakeholders could challenge the terms in a trial-type hearing. Several agency officials commented that they generally conduct more thorough research and provide a more extensive explanation about mandatory conditions and prescriptions than they had for projects prior to section 241. A few agency officials also commented they are requesting licensees to conduct more extensive studies about the effects of their hydropower projects to ensure that the agencies have sufficient information for writing conditions and prescriptions. Views differed on whether conditions and prescriptions were as protective or less protective since section 241 was enacted. All seven environmental group representatives that we spoke with expressed concerns that resource agencies were excluding and writing less protective conditions, prescriptions, and recommendations to avoid trial-type hearings. For example, one group commented that in one hydropower project, under section 241, agency officials settled for stream flow rates that were lower than necessary for protecting and restoring the spawning habitat for fish that swam in the project area. Some agency officials said the conditions and prescriptions they have issued are as protective as those issued prior to the enactment of section 241. Others said that they now issue fewer or less environmentally protective conditions or prescriptions to avoid a costly trial-type hearing. In addition, some other officials commented that instead of issuing conditions and prescriptions that could result in a trial- type hearing, agencies have either issued recommendations or reserved authority to issue conditions and prescriptions at a later time. While a reservation of authority allows the resource agency to issue conditions and prescriptions after the issuance of the license, one regional agency official told us that in his experience, this rarely occurs. At one regional office, two staff biologists and their division chief told us that while they still issue prescriptions that meet the requirements of resource protection, these prescriptions are less protective than they would have been without the possibility of a trial-type hearing. Many agency officials said that the added efforts they put into each license application since the passage of section 241 has greatly increased their workloads for relicensing. Several agency officials also told us that even greater efforts are needed when a trial-type hearing is requested. To complete the work needed for a trial-type hearing, agencies often need to pull staff from other projects. According to these officials, at the local level, pulling staff from other projects can result in the agency’s neglect of its other responsibilities. Officials commented that whether they win or lose a trial-type hearing, agencies must provide the funding for an ALJ, expert witnesses, and their attorneys at a trial-type hearing. Although they did not track all costs, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau of Land Management, Interior’s Office of the Solicitor, FWS, Forest Service, and NMFS provided individual estimates that totaled to approximately $3.1 million in trial-type hearings for the following three projects: Approximately $300,000 for the Tacoma project. Approximately $800,000 for the Spokane River project. Approximately $2 million for the Klamath project. Among all the resource agencies, only NMFS has dedicated funding for section 241 activities. However, this funding only covers administrative costs related to a trial-type hearing and does not fund NMFS’s program staff or General Counsel staff for a hearing. Many of the agency officials, licensees, and other stakeholders we spoke with had suggestions on how to improve section 241 and the relicensing process. For example, several licensees and agency officials raised concerns that the 90-day period for a trial-type hearing, including a decision, was too short and resulted in the need to complete an enormous amount of work in a compressed time frame. Some said that an ALJ who did not have a background in hydropower issues needed more time to review the information presented following the hearing. Some stakeholders suggested allowing the ALJ to make his or her decision outside of the 90-day period. Other stakeholders, however, commented that an extension of the 90-day period could result in greater costs for all parties. One regional hydrologist suggested using a scientific peer review panel rather than an ALJ to hear arguments. Some stakeholders also suggested providing an opportunity to delay the start date of a trial-type hearing if all parties were close to reaching a settlement. The stakeholders we spoke with also had several suggestions that were specific to their interests, which included the following: A couple of licensees noted that while the provisions of section 241 may be used after preliminary conditions and prescriptions are issued, they would like to be able to use these provisions after the issuance of final conditions and prescriptions because of concerns that the final conditions and prescriptions could differ from the agreed-upon terms that were arrived at through negotiations. These licensees assert that if they do not have this option, their only recourse is to sue in an appeals court, after the license has been issued. These licensees were not aware of any instance in which the terms had drastically changed between negotiations and the issuance of the final license. Several environmental group representatives commented that while section 241 allows stakeholders to propose alternative conditions and prescriptions, they would like to be allowed to propose additional conditions and prescriptions to address issues that the resource agencies have not addressed in their preliminary conditions and prescriptions. Three of these representatives also commented that the section 241 criteria for the acceptance of an alternative—adequately or no less protective and costs less to implement—favored licensees, not conservation groups. Instead, one representative suggested that the criterion for an alternative should be that it is more appropriately protective and not that it costs less to implement. In addition, another representative suggested that all interested parties should be allowed to participate in negotiations to modify the preliminary conditions and prescriptions after the submission of an alternative. In his experience, these negotiations have been limited to the stakeholder who uses the provisions of section 241 and the resource agency. A few resource agency officials suggested that licensees who lose the trial- type hearing should pay court costs, such as the costs of the ALJ. They also suggested that licensee reimbursements for the relicensing costs go directly to the resource agencies rather than the General Fund of the U.S. Treasury. Almost 5 years have passed since the interim rules were issued, and several stakeholders that we spoke with expressed interest in having an opportunity to comment on a draft of the revised rules when they become available and before these rules become final. In addition, on June 2, 2009, the National Hydropower Association—an industry trade group—and the Hydropower Reform Coalition submitted a joint letter addressed to Interior, NMFS, and USDA expressing interest in an opportunity to comment on the revised rules before they become final. Section 241 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 changed the hydropower relicensing process, including permitting licensees and other nonfederal stakeholders to propose alternative conditions and prescriptions. All parties involved in relicensing a hydropower project have an interest in understanding how the conditions and prescriptions for a license were modified, if at all, in response to proposed alternatives. Indeed, the interim rules require agencies to provide, for any condition or prescription, a written statement explaining the basis for the adopted condition and the reasons for not accepting any alternative condition or prescription. While we found that the agencies have provided a written explanation for all 42 rejected conditions and prescriptions, they provided a written explanation of the reasons for not accepting a proposed alternative for only 13 of the 140 modified conditions and prescriptions. The absence of an explanation makes it difficult to determine the extent or type of changes that were made. Furthermore, when the interim rules that implemented section 241 were issued on November 17, 2005, the federal resource agencies stated that they would consider issuing final rules 18 months later. Instead, nearly 5 years later, final rules have not yet been issued. Given this delay and the amount of experience with section 241’s interim rules, many stakeholders we spoke with had ideas on how to improve section 241 and several expressed interest in providing comments when a draft of the final rules becomes available. To encourage transparency in the process for relicensing hydropower projects, we are recommending that the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, and the Interior take the following two actions: Direct cognizant officials, where the agency has not adopted a proposed alternative condition or prescription, to include in the written statement filed with FERC (1) its reasons for not doing so, in accordance with the interim rules and (2) whether a proposed alternative was withdrawn as a result of negotiations and an explanation of what occurred subsequent to the withdrawal; and Issue final rules governing the use of the section 241 provisions after providing an additional period for notice and an opportunity for public comment and after considering their own lessons learned from their experience with the interim rules. We provided the departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and the Interior; FERC; the Hydropower Reform Coalition; and the National Hydropower Association with a draft of this report for their review and comment. FERC had no comments on the report. Commerce’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Interior, USDA’s Forest Service, the Hydropower Reform Coalition, and the National Hydropower Association provided comments on the report and generally agreed with the report’s recommendations. While Forest Service, Interior, and NOAA generally agreed with our recommendation that they file a written statement with FERC on their reasons for not accepting a proposed alternative, they all cited a circumstance in which they believed that they were not required to do so. Specifically, the three agencies commented that under the interim rules, they do believe that they are required to explain their reasons for not accepting a proposed alternative when the alternatives were withdrawn as a result of negotiations. Two of the agencies, Interior and NOAA, agreed to indicate when a proposed alternative was voluntarily withdrawn, and NOAA acknowledged that providing an explanation on what occurred after the withdrawal of an alternative may be appropriate in some circumstances. We continue to believe that providing an explanation for not accepting a proposed alternative is warranted, even when the proposed alternative is voluntarily withdrawn as a result of negotiations, and we have modified our recommendation to address this situation. The agencies could add transparency to the settlement process by laying out the basis for the modifications made to the preliminary conditions and prescriptions; the reasons the agencies had for not accepting the proposed alternative, including those alternatives withdrawn as a result of negotiations; and an explanation of what occurred subsequent to the withdrawal. Further, no provision of the interim rules discusses withdrawal of proposed alternatives or provides an exemption from the requirement to explain why a proposed alternative was not accepted. The agencies have an opportunity to clarify their approach to withdrawn conditions and prescriptions as they consider revisions to the interim rules. Interior and NOAA commented that they agreed with our recommendation regarding the issuance of final rules and are considering providing an additional public comment opportunity. According to Interior and NOAA, the resource agencies are currently working on possible revisions to the interim rules. NOAA also commented that resource agencies use the term “modified prescription” as a “term of art” to refer to the agencies’ final prescription, regardless of whether the final prescription actually differs from the preliminary one. As we noted in table 4 of this report, we counted a preliminary prescription as modified if the resource agency does not explicitly accept or reject the proposed alternative. In response to this comment, we added an additional clarifying footnote in the report. Interior suggested that we clarify in our report that agencies have no reason to write less protective recommendations because recommendations cannot be the basis for trial-type hearing requests. We did not change the language in our report because we believe that Interior’s assertion that agencies have no reason to write less protective recommendations may not always be the case. For example, as stated in our report, NMFS officials told us that a licensee had threatened to issue a trial-type hearing request on fish passage prescriptions if NMFS made flow rate recommendations that it did not agree with. The Hydropower Reform Coalition suggested that we collect additional information and conduct further analysis on the use of the section 241 provisions. We did not gather the suggested additional information or conduct additional analysis because in our view, they fell outside of the scope and methodology of our report. Appendixes I, II, III, IV, and V present the agencies’, the Hydropower Reform Coalition’s, and the National Hydropower Association’s comments respectively. Interior, NOAA, and the Hydropower Reform Coalition also provided technical comments, which we incorporated into the report as appropriate. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees; the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, and the Interior; the Chairman of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; and other interested parties. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed are listed in appendix VI. In addition to the contact named above, Ned Woodward, Assistant Director; Allen Chan; Jeremy Conley; Richard Johnson; Carol Herrnstadt Shulman; Jay Smale; and Kiki Theodoropoulos made key contributions to this report.